# Lecture 2.1.2 - Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT)

## Introduction to SIFT
- SIFT is applied to filtered images to detect and describe features that are invariant to changes in scale, rotation, or illumination.
- Most of the computer vision tasks rely on matching features between changing images.
- The idea of this section is to explore different **feature enhancement techniques** between images in order to check if some features remain the same after applying an invariance.
- In the classical CV, we use these techniques for preprocessing our data (or as a middle step in bigger method).
- For example, it would be helpful to define better the features before (or during) a tracking method.


## Types of Invariance
- Illumination
- Scale
- Rotation
- Affine transformations
- Full perspective

## Achieving Invariance
- **Illumination Invariance**
    - **Normalize** with the most intense value in the image.
    - Calculate just the **difference** between two images. If you are certain that two images are exactly the same and only the illumination is different (not scale, rotation, or other invariance).
- **Scale Invariance**: 
    - **Pyramids** is an iterative process that downsamples an image progressively and checks if the feature (such as an edge) is preserved.
        - Proces: Image -> Downsampling (Average of 4 pixels) -> Edge Detector -> Repeat
    - **Difference of Gaussian (DOG)** is also a pyramid method, but instead of applying only a downsampling, it takes the difference between two blurred images (using Gaussian filter) at *different scales*, effectively highlighting regions of rapid intensity change. If the feature exists after the difference, it is scale invariant.
        - Process: Image -> Gaussian filter (of bigger image) -> Downsampling -> Gaussian filter (of smaller image) -> Gaussian Difference -> Refinement -> repeat.
    - For these reasons, it is said that DOG fill gaps that pyramid creates. 
- **Rotation Invariance**: 
    - The idea is that if we analyze the histogram of the image of a feature (e.g. the ear of a cat), theoretically they should look almost the same, but somehow shifted.
    - Alignment to a uniform direction, using histogram of gradient directions.
        - Process:
            1. Plot the histograms
            2. Match the direction by rotating the feature (until the histogram match)
            3. They should be almost the same.

